Document vector similarity functions (#913)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/functions/vector.adoc

> :description: Vector functions allow you to compute the similarity scores of vector pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: Vector functions allow you to compute the similarity scores of vector pairs.
:page-role: new-5.18
```

:link-vector-indexes: xref:indexes/semantic-indexes/vector-indexes.adoc

[[query-functions-vector]]
= Vector functions

Vector functions allow you to compute the similarity scores of vector pairs.
These vector similarity functions are identical to those used by Neo4j's {link-vector-indexes}[vector search indexes].

> Consider for example _k_-nearest neighbor queries, which return the _k_ entities with highest similarity scores based on comparing their associated vectors with a query vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider for example _k_-nearest neighbor queries, which return the _k_ entities with the highest similarity scores based on comparing their associated vectors with a query vector.
```

> Such queries can be run against vector indexes to quickly get an approximate result.

Reviewer: I'm not sure it is clear what "approximate result" means here? 
```suggestion
Such queries can be run against vector indexes to return an approximate similarity score.
```

Author: That's fair. I wanted to avoid restating too much from the vector index documentation, but I'll see if I can clarify this bit.

It's not the score that's approximate; it's whether or not the true nearest neighbours are included in the result set.

Reviewer: I think we should not assume that people have read that page, so a bit more might be necessary here (maybe something like "return an approximate result indicating whether or not the true nearest neighbors are included in the results".

> However, they can also be expressed as an exhaustive search using similarity functions directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, they can also be expressed as an exhaustive search using vector functions.
```

Author: This is specific for the similarity functions, which are a subset of vector functions but the only ones we have currently. It's also the _same_ functions that the index uses, so in my opinion the _directly_ (or something to that effect) is the more important distinction.

Reviewer: Ok, I understand. Maybe we could say "vector similarity functions" - and I'm fine with keeping "directly".

> While this is typically significantly slower than using an index, it is exact and does not require an existing index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While vector functions are typically slower than using an index, they are exact and do not require an existing index.
```

This can be useful for one-off queries on small sets of data.

.k-Nearest Neighbors
======
To create the graph used in this example, run the following query in an empty Neo4j database:

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE
  (:Node { id: 1, vector: [1.0, 4.0, 2.0]}),
  (:Node { id: 2, vector: [3.0, -2.0, 1.0]}),
  (:Node { id: 3, vector: [2.0, 8.0, 3.0]});
----

> Given a parameter `query` (here set to `[4.0, 5.0, 6.0]`), you can query for the two nearest neighbors of that query vector by Euclidean distance by matching on all candidate vectors and ordering on the similarity score:

Reviewer: Sentence is quite along
```suggestion
Given a parameter `query` (here set to `[4.0, 5.0, 6.0]`), you can query for the two nearest neighbors of that query vector by Euclidean distance.
This is achieved by matching on all candidate vectors and ordering on the similarity score:
```

Author: Yes, and the double _by_... This is much better :)

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (node:Node)
> WITH node, vector.similarity.euclidean($query, node.vector) AS score
> RETURN node, score ORDER BY score DESCENDING LIMIT 2;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH (node:Node)
WITH node, vector.similarity.euclidean($query, node.vector) AS score
RETURN node, score
ORDER BY score DESCENDING
LIMIT 2;
```

----

> This returns the two nearest neighbors, analogously to a vector index:

Reviewer: Is the last part of this sentence necessary given what you have previously explained?

```suggestion
This returns the two nearest neighbors.
```

Author: No, you're probably right.

|===

| +node+
| +score+

| (:Node {vector: [2.0, 8.0, 3.0], id: 3})
| 0.043478261679410934

| (:Node {vector: [1.0, 4.0, 2.0], id: 1})
| 0.03703703731298447 

2+d|Rows: 2

|===

======

[[functions-similarity-euclidean]]
== vector.similarity.euclidean()

`vector.similarity.euclidean()` returns a `FLOAT` representing the similarity between the argument vectors based on their Euclidean distance. For more details, see the {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean[vector index documentation].

[source, syntax]
----
vector.similarity.euclidean(a, b)
----

*Returns:*

|===

| `FLOAT`

|===

*Arguments:*

[options="header"]
|===
| Name | Description

| `a`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the first vector.

| `b`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the second vector.

|===

*Considerations:*
|===

| `vector.similarity.euclidean(NULL, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.euclidean(NULL, b)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.euclidean(a, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| Both vectors must be of the same dimension.
| Both vectors must be {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean[*valid*] with respect to Euclidean similarity.

> | The implementation is exactly identical to that of the `latest` available vector index provider (currently `vector-2.0`).

Reviewer 2: I think we avoid saying words like "currently" in the docs :)

> | The implementation is exactly identical to that of the `latest` available vector index provider (currently `vector-2.0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The implementation is identical to that of the `latest` available vector index provider (`vector-2.0`).
```

|===

[[functions-similarity-cosine]]
== vector.similarity.cosine()

`vector.similarity.cosine()` returns a `FLOAT` representing the similarity between the argument vectors based on their cosine. For more details, see the {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[vector index documentation].

[source, syntax]
----
vector.similarity.cosine(a, b)
----

*Returns:*

|===

| `FLOAT`

|===

*Arguments:*

[options="header"]
|===
| Name | Description

| `a`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the first vector.

| `b`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the second vector.

|===

*Considerations:*
|===

| `vector.similarity.cosine(NULL, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.cosine(NULL, b)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.cosine(a, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| Both vectors must be of the same dimension.
| Both vectors must be {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[*valid*] with respect to cosine similarity.

> | The implementation is exactly identical to that of the `latest` available vector index provider (currently `vector-2.0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The implementation is identical to that of the `latest` available vector index provider (`vector-2.0`).
```

|===

| +node+
| +score+

| (:Node {vector: [2.0, 8.0, 3.0], id: 3})
| 0.043478261679410934

| (:Node {vector: [1.0, 4.0, 2.0], id: 1})
| 0.03703703731298447 

2+d|Rows: 2

|===

======

[[functions-similarity-euclidean]]
== vector.similarity.euclidean()

`vector.similarity.euclidean()` returns a `FLOAT` representing the similarity between the argument vectors based on their Euclidean distance. For more details, see the {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean[vector index documentation].

[source, syntax]
----
vector.similarity.euclidean(a, b)
----

*Returns:*

|===

| `FLOAT`

|===

*Arguments:*

[options="header"]
|===
| Name | Description

| `a`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the first vector.

| `b`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the second vector.

|===

*Considerations:*
|===

| `vector.similarity.euclidean(NULL, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.euclidean(NULL, b)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.euclidean(a, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| Both vectors must be of the same dimension.
| Both vectors must be {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean[*valid*] with respect to Euclidean similarity.

> | The implementation is exactly identical to that of the latest available vector index provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The implementation is identical to that of the latest available vector index provider (vector-2.0).
```

|===

[[functions-similarity-cosine]]
== vector.similarity.cosine()

`vector.similarity.cosine()` returns a `FLOAT` representing the similarity between the argument vectors based on their cosine. For more details, see the {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[vector index documentation].

[source, syntax]
----
vector.similarity.cosine(a, b)
----

*Returns:*

|===

| `FLOAT`

|===

*Arguments:*

[options="header"]
|===
| Name | Description

| `a`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the first vector.

| `b`
| A `LIST<INTEGER \| FLOAT>` representing the second vector.

|===

*Considerations:*
|===

| `vector.similarity.cosine(NULL, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.cosine(NULL, b)` returns `NULL`.
| `vector.similarity.cosine(a, NULL)` returns `NULL`.
| Both vectors must be of the same dimension.
| Both vectors must be {link-vector-indexes}#indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[*valid*] with respect to cosine similarity.

> | The implementation is exactly identical to that of the latest available vector index provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The implementation is identical to that of the latest available vector index provider (vector-2.0).
```
